kaszz writes:

Due to a new set of routes published yesterday, the internet has
effectively undergone a schism. All routers with a TCAM allocation of
512k (or less), in particular Cisco Catalyst 6500 and 7600's, have
started randomly forgetting portions of the internet.

"Cisco also warned its customers in May that this BGP problem was
coming and that, in particular, a number of routers and networking
products would be affected. There are workarounds, and, of course the
equipment could have been replaced. But, in all too many cases this
was not done.. Unfortunately, we can expect more hiccups on the
Internet as ISPs continue to deal with the BGP problem." says Steven
J. Vaughan-Nichols of ZDNet.

Is it time to switch to all IPv6 yet?

Gobo adds:

Earlier today there was a hiccup in the Internet as many routers
started "flapping". BGPmon.net tracks the BGP activities on the global
Internet, and came up with the following analysis:

Folks quickly started to speculate that this might be related to a
known default limitation in older Cisco routers. These routers have a
default limit of 512K routing entries in their TCAM memory. [...]
Right now the number of prefixes is still several thousands under the
512,000 limit so it shouldn't be an issue. However when we take a
closer look at our BGP telemetry we see that starting at 07:48 UTC
about 15,000 new prefixes were introduced into the global routing
table.

Whatever happened internally at Verizon caused aggregation for their
prefixes to fail which resulted in the introduction of thousands of
new /24 routes into the global routing table. This caused the routing
table to temporarily reach 515,000 prefixes and that caused issues for
older Cisco routers.

Luckily Verizon quickly solved the de-aggregation problem, so we're
good for now. However the Internet routing table will continue to grow
organically and we will reach the 512,000 limit soon again. The good
news is that there's a solution for those operating these older cisco
routers. The 512,000 route limitation can be increased to a higher
number, for details see this Cisco doc.

xx

All it takes is on ill-trained person at some obscure ISP to induce
routing errors that could bring down the net by table flooding, route
flapping, or null routing huge portions of the net.  This is something
that is terribly fragile (still). Its an attack vector that very few
are watching, and every time it happens everybody talks a great deal
and does just about nothing. Almost all problems have been due to
mistakes or ignorance, but that might not remain that way.  There are
entirely too many routes to be managed by BGP, it was never designed
with Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR) in mind, and its been a
bolt on patch kludge since CIDR was adopted.  (Oddly CIDR was proposed
as a method of controlling routing tables size growth, but it has
proven over time to do the exact opposite. It was proposed so that
sixteen contiguous /24 networks can be aggregated and advertised to a
larger network as a single /20 route. Problem is, very few contiguous
/24 NEED to be routed that way, and more often numerically contiguous
/8s are geographically scattered all over the globe, and their routes
have to be advertised to every backbone router because nobody wants to
handle any traffic but their own regardless of the IP block.

xx

Not entirely correct but not bad. I got to do BGP design/support at a
regional ISP about a decade ago. Or more accurately thats about when I
quit after doing it for quite a few years.

Via the joy of route-dampening which everyone has implemented for the
last 20 or so years, route flapping is quite automatically
... dampened. Flap and the router puts you on a time out list of
naughty kids. To the annoyance of my customers who would do stupid
stuff like flip their router on and off five times in fifteen minutes
and then wonder why they fell off the net for an hour and why none of
their upstreams such as myself could do anything whatsoever to help
them get back online.

As far as flooding and null routing most upstreams have their "moment"
like ours in the 90s, some earlier some later, where you stop trusting
your customers and extensively filter anything they advertise. Which
is easy although a huge waste of cycles. Which means a default-free
tier 1-ish ISP can still screw up, but they usually know what they're
doing and we had limited filtering on them anyway. Go ahead, make my
day, advertise a 0/0 in my general direction while I laugh at you
(probably not good customer service, but...)

Adding to the confusion null routing is actually good, if we give you
a /18 I kinda expect you to null route the entire /18 because you
don't want to waste the bandwidth of playing packet tennis with
traffic to a temporarily unused /28 and from modesty alone (oh and
that route dampening thing) you really don't want to air the dirty
laundry of your internal OSPF meltdown by advertising it to the entire
network. Then again, inevitably a customer has an ethernet switch port
fail on the LAN side of their BGP speaking router and blackhole their
own space this way. There are always tradeoffs.

CIDR helps a lot when ARIN gives you a /20 and you don't want to
advertise 16 /24s. Aside from the whole class-ful address stuff which
means ARIN is quite likely to give you a /20 that under the old
fashioned classFUL notation can't be represented as anything smaller
than an /8 or something. So yeah CIDR is a net win. NANOG mailing list
has a weekly summary of routes that need summarization and people who
ignore them.

High end networking is cool other than the lack of jobs. So I haven't
done stuff like this in a decade. Just no work. Nothing. There must be
like 10 CCNP-ish level people with the skills for every individual
CCNP-ish level job, which is a bummer. There's probably 10-25 guys
doing something else who can wrangle BGP, for every BGP wranglin'
job. Kinda sucks.

You missed a good rant about BGP security, I got out of the biz around
the time the great MD5 crisis was ending. Basically you can/could
spoof reset BGP connections, unless you add a MD5 hash to each packet
which makes it about 2 to the power of 128 or whatever harder than
just sending random TCP RST packets with spoofed source
addresses. Resetting a connection would be pretty bad, yeah. Expecting
operators to route in a civilized manner and not allow source addrs
spoofing on their sh!tty networks is asking too much, so we'll paper
over the problem by adding a shared secret md5 hash to the
packets. What a load of BS.

Can't say I miss ISP work all that much.

xx
